with you if we donate this to the oral history
collection at Texas A&M? Yes, it is. Okay. Which of
the forces were you in? I was in the United States
Army. And what division and unit? I was attached to
the 2 Field Force. It's Roman numeral 2 Field
Force. And I was assigned to the Two Field Force
Artillery, which was a brigade-sized artillery
unit. Okay, and what was your title? I was the legal
officer for the artillery brigade. Okay, and what
was your rank? First Lieutenant. And what dates
were you in Vietnam?
May the 31st, 1970
through...
January the 19th, 1971. Where were you stationed?
I was stationed at a place called Plantation. It
was right outside of Long Ben, which was a large
United States military installation, and right
by the city, Benoit City, which was a Vietnamese
city, town. How did you end up in Vietnam? Were you
drafted or did you enlist? No, I was ROTC at the
University of Texas. Okay. How much did you know
about the war before you left?
Oh, probably not any more than anyone else that
watched TV and read the newspaper at that time. I
really didn't keep up with it a lot. I would watch TV
and read the newspaper, and that's about all I know
about it. Do you think it affected you that you
entered the war after the Tet Offensive and all the
news coverage of that? Do you think you would have
had a different perspective before that? Oh, I
don't think so. I think probably the Tet Offensive
would have, It might have changed my outlook a
little bit on Vietnam and serving in Vietnam.
Probably would have been more of an incentive to be
there. Okay. When you left, what training were you
given?
We had what was called RVN training, Republic of
Vietnam training. It was basically orientation
on the country and the culture of the country,
something about the people, a little bit about
staying alive and
it was a week training, one week training at Fort
Hood where I was stationed when I left. Did you know
any Vietnamese at all or just a brief kind of
overview of their culture? Not really. I didn't
know very much about Vietnam at all when I went
there. What was your first perception of Vietnam?
Well, it was, it appeared to me to be a very backward
country. It was very flat where I was.
Dirty.
with a Vietnamese person?
I was, I shared an office with, my office was in a
building that I shared with, with the civil
affairs officer for our brigade and he, he had a
Vietnamese, he had a counter, his counterpart
with the the Republic of Vietnam, the Army of the
Republic of Vietnam, was a Sergeant Ahn. That was
my first encounter on a personal basis with any
Vietnamese.
He spoke English very well. He was very polite.
Really a nice guy. Was it hard to adjust to daily
life in Vietnam?
Not really. We worked all the time. We worked seven
days a week from seven in the morning until five in
the evening. So there was, you know, you were just
busy. You were working all the time, so it really
wasn't too hard to adjust.
I was not out in the field, so I was not out in the
field a lot, so I was really in an office type job and
really didn't have much problem adjusting to just
doing my job. Do you think it was hard on the people
in the field because they weren't always busy? You
know, fighting was maybe one day out of a month or
whatever. I think it was a little different when I
was there. I think that war was winding down. And it
probably, there probably was some boredom and
some feelings of uselessness helplessness
because the people are not busy every day. They,
you know, they may be doing things that will make
work type activities or tasks. As a legal officer,
what were your duties?
I prosecuted
For the brigade, we were a special court martial
jurisdiction, which meant that the commanding
officer of the brigade was a one-star general, or
he was actually a full colonel general designate.
And he had authority to sentence up to six months in
the confinement in a stockade. So I prosecuted
primarily those cases, handled the
administrative portion or supervised
administrative portion of the court-martials at
the special court-martial level, and advised the
commanding officer of our brigade on the legal
affairs of the brigade and the prosecution of the
cases within his court-martial jurisdiction.
What did you find was the major difference between
a court martial situation as opposed to the normal
court system in the United States? Basically
there's not any real difference between the two
systems that follow essentially the same rules of
evidence and same rules of procedure as the
federal system. I would say that the biggest
difference during the period of time that I was in
the service was the
refusal or the choice by the accused not to use a
jury trial but to elect to be tried by military
judges and sentenced by military judges as
opposed to selecting a jury made up of military
personnel. Most of the people chose to be tried and
if they were convicted, sentenced by military
judges. What type of charges did you bring against
the soldiers? Oh, they ranged everywhere from I
tried one negligent homicide case where a guy
accidentally shot McGillie's best friend to all
types of drug possession and use charges,
marijuana, heroin, and military offenses such as
insubordination, sleeping on guard duty, So they
really range from failure to salute, fairly
insignificant type violations of the military
code of justice, to fairly significant charges,
any of which could have been a general
court-martial, which would be an unlimited
jurisdiction, but for various reasons were tried
at the special court-martial level, which had a
limited sentencing jurisdiction. But I ran
nearly the entire gamut of military violations.
Were they given any, I guess, special treatment
because of their psychological state during the
war? I don't think so. I think there was probably a
relaxing of the
military... rules that is the fewer and fewer
people were ever charged or tried or
court-martialed, I guess, for military
violations like failure to salute or
insubordination or improper uniform or those
kinds of things. Those rules were relaxed in
Vietnam substantially. I think most of the
offenses that were tried dealt with things that
were perceived as something that might get you or
your fellow soldiers killed, drug offenses, and
weapons violations primarily, or somebody got
hurt carelessly using a weapon.
How big do you think the drug problem was during
Vietnam? During the period of time I was there, it
was extensive. It was readily available. The post
I was on had a seven foot or seven or eight foot chain
link fence around it with barbed wire around the
top of it and Constantino wire around the bases out
several feet and the Vietnamese kids would come up
to the fence and throw marijuana over in a five
pound plastic bag. what the price of it was, but it
was relatively inexpensive, but it was very easy
to get. Do you think the North Vietnamese
contributed to it and helped the distribution?
I don't have any real proof of that. I have an
opinion that they probably did. I think it was
psychologically to their advantage to make the
drugs readily available, plus the fact they,
although it was illegal to have, United States
currency in Vietnam. Everyone was issued
military script. Some people still had currency,
and if you could get, say, a $50 bill would buy a lot
more than $50 of military script of anything,
whether it was drugs or contraband or anything of
that nature. Primarily the North Vietnamese and
the Viet Cong would be taking the United States
currency to buy weapons. Why was there a drug
problem in this war as opposed to other wars?
It may have been a sign of our time. We may have had a
drug problem not only in Vietnam but in the United
States. or the beginning of a drug problem in the
United States altogether. I think that it
probably was not a popular war. I'm not sure that
would contribute a lot to the use of drugs in
Vietnam, as opposed to just the availability
and relatively inexpensive availability of the
drugs in Vietnam. We had many guest speakers in my
class, and I noticed that those in the latter part
of the war noticed a big drug problem while the ones
at the first part of the war barely saw any. Do you
think that was true, or is it just where they were
stationed in their perception? No, I think that's
probably true. Understanding I was only there to
see it for a 10-month period. at a time which I felt,
and I believe the war was winding down, a lack of
military operations, a lack of actual day-to-day
combat or military operations or maneuver time on
the hands of the people over there. I think that
that's a winding, a... result or characteristic
of the winding down of the war. Idleness. What
effect do you think drugs had on military
operations?
Well, I don't have any doubt that if you've got
someone that's using drugs during a military
operation, it's got to affect his ability to
perform his job as it would anyone, whether you're
a truck driver or you're you're driving a tank or
trying to, in my case, fire an artillery piece.
I think it will affect and did affect some of the
military operations. I think the problem was more
not during actual operations that people were
using it, but in their free time, if you will, when
they were not on an operation and they were on some
kind of drug. Do you think the drug problem
affected minorities any more or less than the
white soldiers? I really can't answer that. I
don't think so. Let me say, I did not perceive that
you had a greater problem among blacks or
Hispanics than you had among whites. I think we
handled the process just as many all races. I don't
think there was any line drawn between one
particular minority or our minorities and anyone
else. Did you see any cases of racial tension? A
few. I think it was primarily the blacks felt like
they were being discriminated against. It was a
perception that I had and probably from the facts
that they felt they did not get, or not that they did
not get the good jobs, but they got the bad jobs.
In a lack of acceptance of military discipline,
I think that was part of the problem that created
some of the racial tension that I saw. In some
cases, We found out that the North Vietnamese
dropped information to the black soldiers about,
you know, you were enslaved and similar
situations are going on in Vietnam. Did you see any
of that? I did not see any of that literature. I
mean, I believe that to be true because I know that
that's what the civil affairs companies for the
United States Army did over North Vietnam. They
dropped leaflets all the time, so that was part of
their job. I didn't see it in that literature, but I
don't have any doubt that it probably existed.
Okay, what did the Army do for those with a drug
addiction?
Well,
they probably really didn't do very much during
the period of time that I was there. I think that
there was a recognition back in the United States
that a problem and a huge problem was existing as a
result of soldiers coming back to the United
States with drug habits that they were not able to
support in the United States just because of the
cost, the difference in the cost of the drugs. And I
know that there was an effort to counsel and
educate and discipline for drug use and abuse.
While I was there, I served on a particular
committee that was made up of a doctor. I
can't think of his name. Not his name, his title. He
was a preacher. I can't think of
it, Paige. Chaplain? Chaplain. He was a United
States chaplain. and me as a lawyer, and we went to
the various firing batteries in my brigade and
tried to counsel and talk with and educate the
soldiers about the use of drugs and the problems
that they can encounter looking at it from a
medical standpoint, a legal standpoint, and a
religious standpoint. And I know that program was
instituted while I was in Vietnam and carried out.
We did do that. I don't know how successful it was,
but we did do it. What sentences did you give those?
Of course, like I said earlier, I had a very limited
jurisdiction. Six months confinement in a
stockade was the maximum that the jurisdiction I
served in could administer, most of it would be,
and that was one of the reasons that people took the
military judges to impose sentences as opposed to
military juries because they tended to be lesser
sentences than would have been or were in fact
administered by the jury. So most of the offenses
would range from two to three months for drug
possession primarily. And it all depended on
whether this was a first or second offense. And two
to three months of confinement with a loss of
two-thirds pay for that period of time for a first
offender with a hard drug, heroin, marijuana
offender probably wouldn't get maybe 30 days, two
months, depending on a lot of it, depending on how
much they had. And
But that was left strictly up to the judge. I really
had no input into it. He made that decision. Which
drug do you think was the worst in Vietnam?
Well, I think the heroin was, obviously, was the
worst, the most dangerous, and was readily
available. It was cheap, and it was a lot stronger,
a more pure grade of heroin than they were my
understanding that people were able to buy once
they got back to the United States. It was not cut
nearly as much as what was sold on the streets in the
United States back then. What effect do you think
dealing with all these drug problems has on you
today? I mean, do you take a stronger stance
against drugs or maybe legalization of drugs? Oh,
I don't know. I'm probably more intolerant of drug
and drug abuse than I was Well, then I might
otherwise have been, although I doubt it.
I'm just not very tolerant of drug users or drug
sellers.
What percentage do you think were caught?
Caught using? Mm-hmm, caught using drugs. A very
small percentage. There were too many people over
there. There were half a million men over there one
time, and you just didn't handle very many of them.
One percent, two percent. You said you had a
limited field experience. When did you have to go?
I went to,
we had firing batteries that were stationed in
various places in the field. When I arrived in
Vietnam, the Cambodian, it was right in the middle
of the Cambodian invasion, so our firing
batteries were up on the Cambodian border
supporting the Americans, which were over there
for 30 days, but they pulled out right at the end of
May. But the ARVN stayed up in Cambodia and our
batteries supported up there. It was a lot easier
for me to get out to the batteries than it was to
bring or people in for me to counsel or that nature.
So I wouldn't say that I went to the field a lot, but I
was out maybe weekly to one battery or the other
during the time that I was there. Sometimes we
would go in Jeeps or trucks, but most of the time we
flew
in Alconca. Did you ever see any combat? No. Not to
my knowledge. What was the hardest case for you to
try? I
think the negligent homicide case that I had over
there. The kid just accidentally, you know, said
they were sitting around in a hooch one night
shooting a bull, and he pulled his .45 and killed
his best friend. It was a tough case to try.
What happened to the kid? He was found guilty and
got six months in the stockade, which was the
maximum he could have gotten under the
special court martial jurisdiction. I think he
was fortunate that he was, that the general court
martial jurisdiction elected not to process him
at that level because he could have gotten life.
Well, probably not life, 10 years. Do you think he
ever got over it from being on, or was he greatly
affected? No, he was greatly affected. I don't
remember the kid well. I remember he was from a
Midwestern state, Missouri or somewhere like
that. Average intelligence, but not a bad kid at
all. Young, 19.
And I think he was affected. I don't know that he was
affected so much by Vietnam as he was the fact that
he had killed somebody. What effect do you think
the age, well, the difference in age, you'll say,
between Vietnam and World War II had on the cases
you tried and the numbers?
Oh, I think that
I'm not sure there was. There is a difference in age
between the soldiers in World War II and in
Vietnam. And this is my own perception. I perceive
war to be a young thing. young men's game that it's
easier to take 17, 18, 19, 20 year old kids and give
them a rifle and send them off to war there they see a
challenge to it as opposed to someone a little bit
older that may not quite see that as being a
glorious activity. I think that The age
differential, I'm not sure that there really was
one. Or there ever has been. I think young people
sometimes tend to do dumb things. Whether that's
drug abuse or running up a mountain or a hill with a
rifle, screaming at somebody, that's another
thing. I don't think there's an age problem. I
don't think it was an age that would cause more
people to be processed or court-martialed in
Vietnam than there would have been in World War II
just because of the age. I don't think there's an
age difference, really. Do you think you had a
different perception because you had a family and
you were older as opposed to a young soldier? And
what do you think the difference was? No, I think I
did. I very definitely think I had a different
view.
I was not going to take any chances if I could keep
from it.
And by that, I meant I did not want to be out in the
field with a rifle and walking around in the rice
paddies or whatever trying to find Charlie. I
think there were several people that served in
Vietnam that truly enjoyed it. They liked it. I had
a fellow that was in one of the units that I had
jurisdiction over that I tried to recruit to come
into my office. He was a black guy from South Texas.
He had a college education and he would have made a
very good legal clerk. job that I wanted him to do
for me but he was a duster commander he had a duster
which was a trapped vehicle that rode road guard
for convoys and he liked to do that and he he would
not even consider making the change
What type of cases went up to the general court
martial as opposed to your level?
Second offenders.
Cases that involved
a homicide of some kind, generally. And
anything that dealt with a breach of security.
In the military system, any offense can be handled
at any level. So they all can be up there. It just
depends on whether you want to. The general court
martial authority wants to handle those offenses
at that level because of what he believes to be a
serious problem as opposed to something that
ought to be handled at a lower level because of
special circumstances. Most of the cases that
went up would be second offenders, people that
were destined to be removed from the military with
some kind of less than honorable discharge. If
they get a general court-martial, then they were
removed with
dishonorable discharge or some sort of discharge
that would be less than honorable. How long would
it take to get your case tried?
Really not very long. I could get most of my cases
ready from the time that the charges come in from
the field and are processed within 30 to 45 days. So
much faster than the court system here. Yes. We
probably didn't handle as many cases as they
handled here, but we can get them ready for you. A
lot of it was depending on the availability of the
witnesses. If they were in a firing battery way up
north somewhere, it was a little difficult to get
them in. On a few occasions, I went to the field and
tried to get to my court reporter and to the defense
counsel and tried the case in the field if the
military judge would do it. That was a rare
occurrence, but sometimes when you had a lot of
witnesses, it was a whole lot easier to move the
courtroom to the field than it was to bring the
witnesses back for a trial.
Okay. I guess changing subjects. What did you do
after 5 o'clock in Vietnam?
I generally went to the...
back to my room and change clothes. I really didn't
change clothes. I kept the same clothes. I went to
either the officer's open mess or the officer's
club for dinner and I watched a movie almost every
night. Did they bring in American movies? Just the
ones that were showing or a lot of classics? No,
mostly they would have
mostly current movies, first-line, first-run
movies. We watch movies almost every night. Do you
enjoy movies now? Yeah, very much. Still?
Have you seen a lot of movies about Vietnam? I've
seen one or two. Full metal jacket. What did you
think of it? No, it wasn't full metal jacket, it was
the other one. Platoon? Platoon, I saw Platoon.
It's kind of like a lot of movies that you see. I
think probably at some time during the 15 years
that the United States was in Vietnam, those
things happened. I doubt very seriously that they
happened to that one platoon, that all those
things happened to that one platoon. They
condensed all of the horrible things or the good
things that they can show in movies into an hour and
45 minutes and happening to one small group of
people. It didn't bother me. It didn't affect me. I
looked at it as just a movie. How did you think they
dealt with drug use? Do you think it was very
accurate?
I'm not sure I remember how they dealt with it in the
movie. Do you remember? I think it was mostly in
their hootches or whatever and no one was really
caught and a lot of young kids. No, I think that's
probably true. That's probably accurate. That's
really what I was trying to describe to you a few
minutes ago when I said I really didn't think that
they used it in the field but when they would be back
in their base. as probably a method of escape. What
was the climate of Vietnam like? It's tropical.
It's very hot, very humid. And during the rainy
season, it rains every day harder
than you can believe. And then during the dry
season, it stays dry and hot and gets dusty. But
it's hot all the time now. Was that hard to learn to
deal with? No, it really wasn't. Once, at least for
me, once I acclimated myself to the change from a
rather dry climate to a tropical, subtropical
climate, it wasn't any problem. How much do you
know about the military strategy in action? Did
you ever learn anything about it while you were
there, or did they keep you all totally... No, not
really. I wasn't involved tactically in what was
going on in Vietnam, so I didn't go to briefings, to
the tactical briefings. I had my own private
briefing with the general that was, the colonel
that was in charge of our unit, and I didn't sit in on
regular staff meetings, although I was on his
staff, so I really didn't have any input or access
to the tactical part of what was going on and other
than what I read in the newspaper are left here on
the radio. Did you get a military newspaper? We got
a old, it was a, I guess you could call it a military
newspaper. It was two or three pages of kind of
what's factual data of what's going on. So it was
very screened? Yes. Well, I assume it was. I'm
assuming it was I'm not saying it was censored, but
I think they put whatever they wanted to in it. Did
you ever hear about the anti-war protesters while
you were in Vietnam? Oh, yes. We had access to
American television. We watched American
television available, so we watched the news. How
did you feel towards these people? Oh, I probably
was...
I probably had some ill feeling for them
that I didn't like, didn't really like them. I
thought they were probably not patriotic, maybe
cowards.
How did your wife feel about them? Hmm. I think she
probably felt about the same way that I did about
them. That we really didn't, we don't have much
respect. We did not then and I don't today have much
respect for those type, the people that were
demonstrating and draft dodging and going to
Canada or whatever. I'm not saying that I hold
anything against folks that joined the National
Guard. or just drew a lucky number and didn't get
drafted. That's part of the luck of the deal. But I
just don't have much respect for those two. Should
we have allowed the media free access in Vietnam?
Sure. I think so. I don't know. I felt like they had
pretty free access to what was going on in Vietnam.
And I certainly don't see any reason to keep them
out. Should we have allowed other civilians that
weren't media, such as, you know, like Jane Fonda,
whenever that's the most famous, but a lot of the
anti-war protesters? I think it's, you know, it's
not good for morale to have someone who had some
kind of national reputation in the United States
over supporting the North Vietnamese.
I don't think it's good. It is good for morale, but I
don't really think that you can keep it out or you
ought to keep them out. If they want to go over there
and do that, that's fine. Maybe the remedy is
something other than stopping them from going.
Let them stay. Don't let them come back. What
effect did television have on the war since this
was the first televised war? I think it had
significance. I don't own the war. It had a
significant effect on the people that were
involved in it. They knew more about what was going
on in this war than participants in any other war, I
suppose, on a daily basis because you could turn
the TV on and watch the 6 o'clock news or the 5.30
national news broadcast and find out more about
what was going on in Vietnam, around Vietnam, and
in the United States because of Vietnam.
Probably... Well, not probably than any other war
that I know
of. What perception did the soldiers or you have of
the different presidents? I guess for that time it
was Nixon.
Because, I mean, did television cloud that? I got
to think about that. Was Nixon the president when I
was there? When did Johnson go there?
Sixty-eight.
Well,
I guess that we felt, I felt, let me just say what I
felt. I felt like that Vietnam was a war that could
have been won had we wanted to win the war. I don't
know too much about what the political risk for an
all out invasion, an all out effort to win that war
would have caused around the world, if any, might
not have caused anything.
And I really felt like it was a situation where, had
we have not been so concerned about our worldwide
image and even maybe our image back at home, that
war could have been over in six months to a year. So
you think we should have been in Vietnam?
I don't have an opinion whether we should have been
there or we should not have been there. At the time,
it was something that I had volunteered myself to
do. decided, I made the decision when I joined,
when I started in college, to join the ROTC knowing
full well that when I got out of there, the chances,
out of the school, the chances were better than
50-50 that I would wind up in Vietnam.
I looked at it as my job. And I went because I was told
to go. I really made no judgment about whether we
should have or should not have been there. If I look
back on it now, the way we handled it, it probably
was a mistake to have been there. Whether it
affects our national security, whether it would
have affected our national security back then, or
some significant national interest that we had in
preserving Vietnam, I really don't have a very
good feeling for the fact that we were over
there. Did that answer that?